We're able to handle the user input
now, time to add some validation.
We already got the validation rules here,
so the goal would be to have a look at these rules in update input state and update the valid property
accordingly,
so how do we do that?
There are different approaches and you can of course always find a more elaborate approach.
Now what I want to do therefore is I'll add a file here in the source folder, there I'll add a utility
folder and in that folder, I'll add validation.js and there I want to create some validation methods,
so the methods I can execute that will do validation as well as one master method so to say which
I can execute to run the appropriate sub-methods for validation.
Sounds confusing,
let me show you what I mean. I'll add a validate method here,
so const validate will be an arrow function where I simply expect to get the value and the rules,
these two arguments. In there, I now want to have a look at all the rules and validate this value for each
rule that applies, since rules will be a javascript object because we configured it to be one, validation
rules is a javascript object, I'll use a for in loop,
so for let rule in rules loops through all these rules
and in here, I'll then add a switch case statement where I switch the rule and for the different cases, I execute different
functions which will do the actual validation.
So there, I could have a case which is isEmail because that is one of the rules we use, isEmail,
we also have minLength and equalTo.
Now these rules also have values so these are only the properties of course, the values of the rules
will also become important
but right now, let's just stick to the property itself,
camel case isEmail then dictates that I want to execute some function, const email validator, something
like that where I get the value and then return if this value is a valid email address or not.
So here I would then execute email validator, pass on the value
but I also need to store the result of thisValidation. For this,
I'll add a property, isValid and I'll set it to true by default
and then here, I'll set isValid equal to the email validator result because if this fails, it clearly
should be invalid but I'll also set it to isValid and the result of the e-mail validator.
The idea behind this is that if I had another rule which was checked before isEmail and that would
set isValid to false, then that this result here wouldn't then override the general validity of this
value we receive.
So we always take the previous validity
we already have
and then just update our new piece of information
and only if all of them are true, isValid will come out as true or if we have no rules that apply,
then it's also true because that's the default value. So that's the isEmail case, if we have a look at auth.js,
we also have minLength and equalTo,
so I'll add these two methods here too, these two functions here too, minLength validator also receives
the value but also receives the second argument, the minLength I want to check,
so here I need some additional configuration,
this is why I do have these values here in my controls object in this state in auth.js.
So with this, here I will then in the end also return some information, so we can add a case here where we
check minLength
and if this applies, then isValid is isValid and the result of our minLength validator where I pass
on the value and keep in mind, the minLength which is just the value of our validation rule, right,
minLength is the key, the value is the minimum length we want to check,
so the second argument here is just rules and then access the current rule
and this will give us the value for that rule. And then I'll add a third method here, equalTo validator,
there I expect to get a value and another value,
so maybe we name this one check value, whatever you want and it will simply compare these two values
and then also return true or false
and therefore we can now also add a case here, case equal to and then we set isValid equal to isValid
and the result of the equalTo validator where we pass the value and where we then also pass rules
rule.
Well that's not entirely what we want,
here we set equalTo to password,
so we actually want to get the value of some other control.
Now since that information lives in the auth screen component and not in our validation file, we'll have to
add some logic here to pass the right value to our validation function here.
So rules rule, this is what I'll pass on for now,
we can always revisit this if we need to change it later on.
Now finally, I'll add a default case where I set isValid to true
again, this is not strictly required but some linting rules might require you to add it
and then at the end, I will return isValid here in our validate function.
Now with that, we got to implement all these other validators,
let's start with e-mail. For this, we'll reuse our regular expression,
now if you're a regular expression expert, definitely feel free to write this on your own.
I will go to stack overflow by googling for js regex email and find some help there and there, you
will find this response which gives you this regular expression that should match or handle most e-mail
addresses. With that, what
we can simply do is we can return this regular expression, wrap it between forward slashes and then
simply call test and pass your value and test will return true or false,
so this will automatically give you back whether this did succeed or not, so whether you have a valid
email or not.
Now minLength is of course pretty easy,
there we simply return val and check if the length of it is greater or equal
and now you can fine tune this to your needs,
should it strictly be greater or is equal also
ok? Here I'll go with greater or equal to minLength, so to the second argument we get. And the equalTo validator,
there I will simply return if value equals value.
Now with that, the only thing I have to do is I have to export validate here and I'll export it as the default
of this file,
so validate is my default export
and now we can use this validate function from our auth.js file.
So for this, I'll import it first of all, I'll import validate from
and now I just need to go to this utility folder and import it from the validation folder.
And now we need to handle this or run this function in update input state
when we set the validity of this value.
So for this, what I can do is I can just call validate here and pass both the value and previous state
controls for the given key
and there, we have our validation rules property which stores all the validation rules, and this
is a javascript object which we handle in the validate method,
don't forget this.
The only issue we'll have is with the equalTo validation because in the equalTo validator here,
we actually try to check the two values for equality but the value we set up here in the auth screen for
equalTo is just the name of the property of which we want to get the value.
So in order to make sure that we handle this case correctly too, I will add an if statement here in update
input state and I will see if this state controls for the given key, if in the validation rules here,
equalTo exists. Now this is a very long check
but this simply checks if we do we have the equalTo rule
and if we do have it, I want to store some information and some extra property, I'll name it connected values
and it should be,
and it's undefined by default of course
and if we do have equalTo and of course you could add more checks if you had other types of connected
values too,
then I want to set connected value to a javascript object, actually I'll initialize it to be an empty javascript
object so that it would be easier to extend
but then I'll set connected value to a javascript object where I take the old connected
value or properties which are none here
but again if this were a more complex validation where you have other connected values too, then this
might be useful
and there, I'll add the equalTo property then and set it equal to this state controls, now we take
the key, so the control of which we're currently doing the validation and so on
and there I access validation rules equalTo, I know that it exists because that's exactly what I'm checking
here in the if statement,
now I get the name of the control which should be equal,
so this is now actually some extra data I don't want to store here in equalTo
but in some extra property,
so here I'll name this equal control and extract the value stored equal to,
so for confirm password, this will be password.
And now that I got the equal control identifier, I can get the value of the equal control, turn this
into a constant I'm not about to change it,
so I'm going to get the value so I'll name it const equal value and set this equal to this state controls and
now access the equal control
and there, just the value
and with that now, I can set for my connected value equal to the equal value.
Now what's the idea behind this very complex way of getting the value of the equal control?
Well now I got this property added to my connected value object and to the validate function, I can now
pass a third argument, connected value.
We don't expect it yet but we can go back to the validate method and actually get connected value
here so that we have a reusable and dynamic way of getting connected values if required and for equal
to, we would then not pass on rules rule but we would pass on connected value rule,
keep in mind that rule is still equalTo
and this is the identifier I'm using here too, in my connected value we also use equal to but the stored value
now really is the value which should be equal
and we can only get this information from within the auth screen,
we can't get it in our helper method but now we have a really good way of getting this information correctly
and with that we should have a valid validation method or function here.
Now that was a lot of work,
let's now see if this works and how can we see if it worked.
Well besides not getting an error, what we can always do of course is we can inspect our state
and as I have my react debugging tools attached, this should be easy.
So save everything and reload this page and now let's inspect this email address, for this I'm going to expand
this explorer, toggle the inspector and click on this input. However I'm not interested in the input
here,
I'm interested in the entire auth screen because this is where I have my controls state and the email
and now let me see, it's false by default, if I now start typing I immediately get an error,
value of type Boolean. Well because I set value equal to validate, value of course should still
be equal to value,
so to the value we receive as the second argument in update input state, here I want to set the valid property.
So let's fix this and let's reload and try again,
let's search for the auth screen again,
here it is, here we have controls,
let me type here.
Now if we inspect e-mail, you see that here, valid is now true already, if I remove everything it's
also true so validation doesn't really work right now,
let's see what's wrong.
So what's wrong is in our validation.js file, I of course
forgot my break statements and therefore the code fall through or fell through
and hence, we always made it into the default case where we just set it to true isValid.
With this change in place if we now reload the application and dig into our auth screen one more
time,
here it is,
let's now inspect controls and the e-mail control one more time.
Now valid is false but if I do enter a valid email address, it becomes true,
let's also see what password says.
If I do enter something here, as soon as it's six characters long it becomes valid and confirm password
is false,
if I now enter something here, it immediately is true
so it's always true. So confirm, that doesn't work,
the rest works,
now let's fix the confirm password then. The error for this can also be found in the validation.js
file, the equalTo validator and check if value is equal to value
and guess what,
that's always true should be equal to check value of course.
So now with that, let's reload this one more time
and inspect everything
on the auth screen controls, let's now have a look at confirm password.
Let's enter a normal password first
and now if I type confirm password, it becomes valid
as soon as it's equal to the other password, if I type one more character, it becomes invalid.
Now with that, we get validation in place, there's just one issue,
if we ever had equal passwords here and I type on the other password, then confirm password doesn't become
invalid even though now the two don't match.
Now to fix this, we can go into auth.js where we have our update input state method,
one thing I want to do is I don't just want to update the state of our value for the key we're working
on, so for the password
but also of the confirm password,
so what I'll do is I will hardcode confirm password
in here,
set it equal to previous state controls, distributed
all the properties controls confirm password and set valid to
and now it depends if key which is the first argument we get here,
so that would be password for example, if this is equal to password, then I want to rerun the validate function,
the value however will be taken from the previous state because I don't want to use the state of the
password control but of the confirm password one, so controls confirm password value would be the value I
pass on. The rules will of course be the validation rule so previous state controls confirm password
validation rules
and a third argument, the connected value will also be passed though that would not be set.
First of all let me pass the alternative where I take the old value, so previous state controls confirm
password valid, in case that we don't validate password right now,
then I want to leave the valid state of confirm password as it was. Now the problem is connected
value which is only set if the control we're looking at which would be password,
if that does have an equalTo validation rule.
Now we can simply add another if block here
where I say well yes if key is equal to password, I also want to set connected value then.
So to do this, I'll then set connected value as here,
however equal control can be hardcoded to be password because we can't extract it dynamically from
the controller we're looking at because we're looking at password and equal value
then works as before.
So it's quite a verbose update input state method,
I'm sure you can always fine tune this but it will do the job for our auth screen here.
With this we could test this
but the one issue we'll have is if we actually do work on the confirm password field, so key is confirm
password, then we would first of all correctly set all the values here
and then we would always override it with this set up here,
so this is not really optimal.
Now there are two approaches to circumvent that,
you could wrap this set state call in an if statement to also only use this more verbose
version of it if you are really targeting the password field or are you switch the order so that
our hardcoded confirm password check always comes first, like this.
If you do that then your dynamic check will override the hardcoded one,
one other thing we can and we should do is here where we set a connected value for the we are typing
into password case, we're using this complicated way of extracting the value we want to compare and confirm
password to,
we can remove that. The value we want to compare to
is just the value the user's entering because don't forget, we're typing in a password field, so we can
set this and we should set this equal to value,
otherwise we won't even get the correct value because we will be fetching the old one from state.
Now with that if we reload our application here and we again dive into our auth screen here and have a
look at the confirm password validity, if I enter tester into the main password, enter tester and confirm,
it's valid, if I enter something into the main password, it's false, if I revert this,
it's true
again. Let's now also confirm that password and email behave correctly,
password is valid,
it's not if I make it too short and email also, well we tested before becomes valid
if we do enter a valid email address otherwise it will be invalid.
So with that, we get validation in place was quite a lot of work but the equal to validation obviously
is the most complex thing to handle. With that,
let's move on and let's see what we can do with that information
because inspecting it here is nice for us but not that helpful to our users.